# food-grain-storage-monitoring-system

Agricultural practices proves to be India’s largest source of livelihoods with 80 percent of its total rural household population dependent on agricultural produce as their main source of income. The total food grains production in India is estimated to increase two percent in the 2020-2021 crop period to an all-time record of 303 million tons which is a lot of produce compared to other countries. Also, the country manages to waste 67 million tons of food every year that has been valued at around Rs 92,000 crores—an amount equal to feed the people of a whole state. A major problem lies in the fact that food wastage mainly occurs during the harvesting, processing, distribution and retailing process. There is an urgent need to reduce the amount of food wasted, to which a proper storage technique to safeguard the food grains need to be implemented. This is done through automation in the form of IoT which helps through the continuous monitoring and tracking done on the food grains that enter the storage warehouses. Thus, the proposed method involves an IoT system which consists of an ESP8266 NodeMCU module interfaced with two sensors that collect data such as humidity, temperature and percentage of CO2 and is uploaded to the cloud database. This data gets notified to the user and in case of variations in the parameters, control measures are placed to ensure that the food grains remain in the optimum conditions with respect to the surrounding environment.
